---
layout: post
title: "Citi-Bike trip data analysis"
description: null
image: assets/images/citi-post.jpg
nav-menu: true
---

<font size=6><p>Data-driven solutions are exciting and fun to build. Deriving insights using data is quite useful and requires minimal effort.
I recently explored one such dataset <a href="https://citibikenyc.com/system-data">Citi_bike</a>. The dataset is quite big and spans over several years, which does make the analysis a bit computationally heavy but also enables a much meaningful derivation of results.</p></font>

<font size=6><p>My aim was to generate a heatmap for the trip activities in a section of the city, the most active regions perhaps. The idea behind the heatmap was to check whether the geolocation of railway stations close to these cycle hubs had an impact on the overall traffic generated. We will explore the results later, in the following sections I will talk about different tools used and the thought process behind the derivation. This will be a small post and more of the exploration can be done using my Github <a href ="https://github.com/adoprox">Ashutosh Dhaka</a>. As the project is executed using python notebooks its pretty intuitive and accelerates the result generation process.
</font></p>

<p><font size=6>
The Citi Bike is one of the biggest station-based bike-sharing systems in the United States. The dataset includes more than 900 stations and 14000 bikes, and it contains over 17 million bike rides observed during 2018. This dataset has the general objective of helping Citi Bike operating at its best and of
making bike sharing more accessible. In a more technical sense its a huge dataset with about 17 million rows and about 15-20 columns. The columns give information about start and stop times for the rides, the gender and subscription used by the user, but most importantly the geolocation of all the starting and ending stations for each trip. Also each station is given a unique station ID for identification. This station ID comes handy when clustering stations for generating traffic information for each cluster of cycle hubs.
</font></p>

<p><font size=6>
Coming to the functions aspects of the project. We used the <a href = "https://github.com/modin-project/modin">modin</a> with Pandas to load the dataset. As modin significantly increases the data loading speeds, and it does not alter any commands we generally use with Pandas its a very handy library to use and function with. For making the neural network using <a href = "https://keras.io/">keras</a> is good enough. Also modifying the feature set according to lag variables was done using class notes, and a pretty neat function is used to make it happen. For plotting the heatmap <a href="https://python-visualization.github.io/folium/latest/">folium</a> was really handy and also presented with the opportunity to use <a href=https://geopandas.org/en/stable/.>GEOPANDAS</a>. GEOPANDAS generates these columns with a LOCATION datatype and makes it really simple to plot against the frequency of their occurrence for the heatmap. So file generates 24 heatmap, 12 for each month, pickup and dropoff for the citi-bikes. Each heatmap is interactive and supports a tag feature to view the number of pickups or dropoffs including the station IDs. 
</font></p>

<p>PREDICTION MODEL RESULTS HERE</p>

<p><font size=6>The more observable feature about the heatmap are the spots marking the closest train stations nearby, as seen some stations have a higher concentration of traffic during the year. The other stations are more seasonal with that respect. Initially folium was not used and other clustering techniques were used to mark the stations with high concentration, as seen it didn't help much and using a better tool visually was important.</font></p>

<p>INSERT IMAGE HERE FOR HEATMAP</p>

<p><font size=6>Overall the dataset was an interesting insight into how shared bikes are used in one of the busiest cities and how even between all that chaos we use math to make sense of it. I look forward to making other such projects and focus more on the analytical aspects rather than just the visual ones. Ciao </font></p>
